As soon as Kamala Harris took to the stage in Wilmington, Delaware, on Saturday night, social media was abuzz with talk of her outfit. It was a telling sign, for better or worse, of the public scrutiny her fashion will face in the coming years.
But while the Vice President-elect's acceptance speech will surely, and rightly, be remembered for the words of inspiration offered to women in America and around the world, the commentary on her wardrobe was not as trivial as it might seem. Because, rather than distracting from her words, the white pantsuit and pussy bow blouse served to reinforce her message of unity and emancipation.
On a night that Harris credited to the women before her -- "I stand on their shoulders," she said of those who fought for voting rights at the beginning of the 20th century, and of the "new generation" that had exercised those rights last week -- she also channeled their symbolism.
The color white has long been associated with the women's suffrage movement, adopted as a symbol of moral purity alongside green for hope and purple for dignity. It also signaled their ethos of nonviolence, an olive branch to those threatened by their then-radical calls for political equality.
But Saturday night wasn't just about the suffragettes. Harris, the first Black and first South Asian Vice President-elect, was standing on the shoulders of Shirley Chisholm, who wore white as she became the first African American woman elected to Congress in 1968. She was standing on the shoulders of Geraldine Ferraro, who wore all-white to accept the role of Walter Mondale's running mate in his 1984 presidential campaign. She was standing on the shoulders of Hillary Clinton, who wore a signature white pantsuit to accept the Democratic presidential nomination in 2016.
Harris' very deliberate choice of outfit was a gesture of solidarity with the long line of women who have defied expectations in American politics. It demonstrated that the Vice President-elect does not consider herself an exception to the rule, but rather part of a continuum -- of the slowly bending "arc of the moral universe," as President-elect Joe Biden put it in his own speech, quoting Martin Luther King Jr.
Harris' pussy-bow blouse, too, carried historical weight. It evoked the power-dressing of Margaret Thatcher, who wore hers the way male colleagues wore ties, a fitting metaphor for how the UK's former prime minister co-opted and remade the boys' club rules of 1980s British politics. More recently, Melania Trump's choice of the classic garment at very particular moments -- namely an anti-cyberbullying summit and a presidential debate shortly after the "Access Hollywood" tape came to light -- were, some speculated (wishfully, perhaps), subtle barbs aimed at her husband's infamous brag.
The Vice President-elect was clearly looking beyond the Trump era to something more universal. But her outfit, reportedly created by American fashion designer Wes Gordon for Carolina Herrera, spoke of recent history in other ways, too.
The women of the Democratic Party have continuously used white in silent protest against a president whom they consider a threat to their rights. At Trump's joint address to Congress in 2017, a group of female lawmakers synchronized their outfits to raise awareness for women's issues, including reproductive rights and equal pay.
They did so again at successive State of the Union addresses, most recently in February this year, as lawmakers marked a century since the 19th Amendment gave women the right to vote (though women of color would face voting barriers for decades longer). The sight of Nancy Pelosi in all-white clapping sarcastically behind the President a year earlier, while a great block of white-clad congresswomen sat before him, will also live long in the memory. Harris was standing on all their shoulders, too.