With no end to the global pandemic in sight, fashion and sportswear brands have been quickly adapting their lines to include face masks decorated with logos and stylish patterns.
While cloth masks made of traditional materials can help slow the spread of Covid-19, according to the World Health Organization, some labels are going one step further. They're marketing new accessories, and in some cases entire clothing lines, as having antimicrobial properties -- applications that inhibit the growth of microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi, or reduce viral activity. But what does antimicrobial fashion do, and can it provide extra protection during a pandemic?
In recent months, brands including Burberry have introduced masks that, they claim, are protected from microbes and germs. Burberry's forthcoming beige and blue designs come in the label's signature check. Under Armour's multi-layered UA Sportsmask, which is ​marketed as having antimicrobial properties, sold out in under an hour when it was released this summer.
And Diesel is selling denim that it claims is "virus-fighting." The Italian brand announced that it will use a technology called ViralOff -- which it says "physically halts 99% of any viral activity" -- in a number of items in its Spring-Summer 2021 collection. ViralOff works "by interacting with key proteins, inhibiting the virus from attaching to textile fibers," reads Diesel's press release.
In the US, brands cannot claim that products will protect wearers from SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19, without providing sufficient evidence. ​Therefore, some labels simply allude to extra protection or hygiene, though the small print often reveals that antimicrobial treatments are only intended to inhibit bacterial or viral growth, not protect the user from pathogens. (Washing garments with soap once a day, as recommended by the World Health Organization, or WHO, can also kill bacteria and viruses.) The FDA and CDC ​did not immediately respond to CNN's requests for information regarding products that have been tested ​or submitted for formal approval.
Without sound scientific testing by brands across the board, it is difficult to assess whether antimicrobial treatments can protect wearers from the novel coronavirus, according to Amy Price, a senior research scientist at Stanford Anesthesia Informatics and Media (AIM) Lab who has advised the WHO on its face mask guidelines.
"The challenge is that sometimes claims are made, but they aren't tested on the actual masks or with the actual virus," she said over a video conference call. "So they're like gimmicks." ​Price has not tested any of the products mentioned in this article.
Some companies say they have tested their products with SARS-CoV-2, like IFTNA's PROTX2 AV that Under Armour says it uses, and HeiQ's Viroblock, which, according to the company's website, is used by numerous brands to produce reusable face masks, coats and even mattresses. IFTNA says recent lab testing "shows PROTX2 AV's efficacy against Covid-19," while HeiQ claims that Viroblock, which is added to the fabric during the final stage of the textile manufacturing process, has been "tested effective against Sars-CoV-2." CNN has not been able to independently verify these claims.
But some ​others have not revealed which viruses, if any, their products have been tested on, muddying the waters of so-called "antimicrobial" fashion.
Price, who studied the effectiveness of fabric masks alongside AIM Lab's director, Larry Chu, said there are a number of variables that determine how much protection a product offers.
"Oftentimes, bacteria and viruses have different ways of reproducing, and different things are effective against them," she explained. "With antimicrobial (treatments) it's important to know what you're dealing with, what it's been tested with and if it's safe for human skin.
"(With) anything that you put on your face -- especially that you're going to be wearing day in and day out -- you want to make sure it is really something that is safe or FDA approved."